People who come to the Zoo periodically express dissatisfaction if they see old or sick animals on display. Nowadays, when economics is the main discipline, it may seem impractical for someone to occupy an aviary with such a "substandard" inhabitant, when a more advantageous healthy and young specimen could take its place. But the staff of the Zoo has it’s own principled position on this.

People who come to the Zoo periodically express dissatisfaction if they see old or sick animals on display. In principle, they can be understood — such animals often differ from their "healthy" counterparts in both behavior and exterior. They may have a dull or patchy coat, a limping gait, and, of course, they are not nearly as active as their young counterparts. Nowadays, when economics is the main discipline, it may seem impractical for someone to occupy an aviary with such a "substandard" inhabitant, when a more advantageous healthy and young specimen could take its place. But the staff of the Zoo has its own principled position on this. We always ask visitors to treat all our animals with respect, regardless of their appearance. We have several long-lived animals: a white tigress, a hyena dog; even a crocodile, which was brought to Moscow after the war. The very fact that animals live with us much longer than in nature suggests that good conditions have been created for them. We love our centenarians and are proud of them. They are no less dear to us than young animals, and we would really like visitors to understand their peculiarities and needs.

Do you remember the crocodile Gena, who "served as a crocodile in the zoo"? We can say that our long-lived animals have also "served" in the zoo all their lives. During this time they have become practically members of our big zoo family! We know all the peculiarities of their characters, addictions and sores, and they know their keepers and all their habits and weaknesses perfectly well. We must not forget about the visitors. Among them there are people who remember the giraffe Samson from childhood and now bring their own children to visit him. It seems to us that it is wonderful when visitors form personal relationships with our animals. "The famous giraffe Samson" evokes much stronger emotions than "just some giraffe", and this contributes to the emergence of interest in its biological features and sympathy. You will not put your beloved dog or cat to sleep just because she has become old, fat and sleeps on the couch all day! It is also unthinkable for us! Our centenarians have been pleasing zoo visitors for many years, so we have certain obligations to them. How can I not remember the famous phrase of Antoine de Saint-Exupery: "You are forever responsible for everyone you have tamed." The hero of his novel, the Fox, explained to the Little Prince that only by taming someone, you can find a friend and fill your life with meaning: "... if you come at four o'clock, I will feel happy from three o'clock. And the closer to the appointed hour, the happier. At four o'clock I will already start to worry and worry. I will find out the price of happiness!" Don't you think that this is about the relationship between an animal and a keeper?

I feel that some zoologists are already ready to accuse me of excessive sentimentality and anthropomorphism, so I will try to move from literature to zoo practice. I think that the majority of zoo employees will agree with this position: if an animal does not suffer and is able to enjoy life, we have no right to "release the cells", no matter how "economically justified" it may be. But how to determine whether the beast is good or bad? This is a really difficult question, because he will not answer you with words. And yet a person is quite capable of assessing the condition of an animal if he deciphers the "language of his body". This concept includes special expressive poses and body movements, facial expressions and vocalization, knowing the meaning of which, a person can judge the level of well-being of an animal. Of course, there are other important signs. If the animal has a good appetite, he enthusiastically plays and is keenly interested in everything that is happening around — it means that his interest in life has not yet faded. In this case, we will do everything so that he lives in the zoo as long as possible, despite how he looks.

In the pavilion "Cats of the Tropics" lives a wonderful long-lived white Bengal tigress Kali, who was born in 1997. Of course, veterinarians constantly look after this elderly lady, periodically examine her and treat her as needed. Despite her advanced age, she looks almost as beautiful as before, walks with pleasure, walks around her aviary several times along trampled paths, leaves marks in certain places, plays with her toys, and then lies down on her favorite place — a wooden platform. Here she basks in the sun and surveys the surroundings — from a height they are better visible. And Kali also likes to hunt for visitors. She takes a hunting stance and begins to sneak towards the "prey". When she reaches the glass, Kali makes an unexpected throw, and then watches with interest how the person reacts to it. It can be seen from everything that Kali is still able to enjoy life, and it seems to us that watching her gives no less pleasure to visitors.

Now let's talk about animals with health problems. Here the situation is more complicated. Of course, there are diseases that are incompatible with life or bring their owners constant suffering. Where medicine is powerless, it is necessary, sadly, to submit to the inevitable. But there are other cases. For example, a couple of tundra wolves live on the "Island of Beasts". The female has damage to her front paw, which makes it difficult for her to move and noticeably spoil her appearance. However, if you observe the behavior of this pair of predators, for sure, pay attention to the very friendly relationship between male and female, to their touching care for each other. The she-wolf really limps badly, but this does not in the least disturb the harmony reigning in this friendly couple. And, of course, we are not going to separate our wolves and look for a new beautiful mate for the male, especially since we know that these animals are characterized by long-term, and sometimes lifelong monogamy. It will be very traumatic for them to lose a partner, but the shortcomings of the exterior of one of them do not bother the wolves at all.

Special attention should be paid to the story of our little gorilla Ama, who had a lot of misfortunes. For a number of reasons, she was raised by our keepers from the age of two months, and she could communicate with other gorillas only at a distance. At four months old, as a result of an accident, Ama lost her arm. At that moment, it seemed to us that it was impossible to return her to normal life. Suffice it to say that EAZA recommended euthanasia to us. But we couldn't even imagine such an outcome. Ama is a very cheerful child, she has a wonderful character, and she is a real fighter. We decided to take a chance and try to bring Amu back to the gorilla group. The first contacts were very tense and unpredictable. The male Vizuri was initially wary of Ama, attacked her many times and prevented her from communicating with other gorillas (you can read more about this on our website). Ama had a hard time, but gradually she learned to understand the other members of the group and react correctly to their actions, give way to Visualization and take soothing poses. Gradually, the situation improved: the aggression of the Vizuri has practically stopped, and now Ama spends most of her time with other gorillas, wherever they are: in the basement, in the exhibition enclosure or on the street. The adaptation process took a long time, and not only the zoo staff, but also some visitors followed him with excitement. They constantly asked questions, and we talked on our website about how things are at Amyn at the moment. Portraits of all our gorillas with brief descriptions were placed in the pavilion near the aviary, and now interested visitors have learned to distinguish them by face. Ama, of course, arouses the greatest sympathy and interest, and we have never heard people complain about her presence in the group. She always finds something to do, stubbornly learns new skills, and her physical disability does not prevent her from enjoying life. We even believe that the exposure of such animals has a special educational value, it contributes to the manifestation in children (and in adults!) tolerance, empathy and understanding that every living being has the right to a full life.

Other gorillas also had their fans. Some people like the youngest and most beautiful female Shinda, Ama's mother, who was the last to join the gorilla group in 2012. Most visitors do not even realize that she is seriously ill. Shinda also had a hard time, at first the group took her "with hostility". Gradually, the aggression came to naught, and in 2013, Shinda gave birth to Amu, but soon lost her (details of this sad story can be read on our website). And then she started having seizures of epilepsy. If they caught up with Shinda on a high shelf, she fell from it to the concrete floor. We were close to despair — the attacks became more frequent, and the attitude of other gorillas to Shinda worsened, They began to show aggression, take away her food ... Here we must say thanks to our veterinarians — in the end they were able to find a medicine that completely stopped the attacks. Shinda still takes it every day. She gradually returned to normal and was able to take a decent position in the group. Now she has become so bold that sometimes she even bullies other females.

The oldest female Papsi, who is already more than 40 years old, has her own fans. Papsy has lived a very busy life. The only one of all gorillas, she was born in nature, in 1986 she got to the zoo in Leipzig. There she lived with the male Gaydi, and in 1998 she moved to Moscow with him. Gaydi also had epilepsy, and Papsy had to survive his death. Of course, it was very stressful for her, because Papsy had lived with him for more than 25 years. We decided that only the appearance of new gorillas could bring her out of depression, and in 2006 a young male Vizuri and a female Kira arrived at the Zoo. At first, Papsy didn't get along very well with them, but in 2009, Kira's first cub, a Viking, was born, and her second life began. From a silent and sad observer, Papsi turned into an active member of the group. She became very friendly with Kira and in all conflicts with Visuri unconditionally took her side. Sometimes the females together drove the Vizuri all over the outdoor enclosure, causing confusion among visitors. It turned out that Papsi, who had never given birth, loves children very much: she often played with the Viking and always protected him from the wrath of the Vizuri, she could even hit this huge male (which other females never allowed themselves). Papsi's support became especially important for Viking when Kira had a second son, Kvabena (for her Benya). All of Kira's attention was focused on the baby, and the Viking felt abandoned. That's where his "grandmother" Papsi saved him. The "beloved grandson" could tinker with her as much as he wanted and even ride, although it was clearly not easy for Papsy to carry him. In December 2014, the Viking went to the Warsaw Zoo, but by that time Benya had grown up, and now Papsy was playing with him. Of course, during this time she did not get younger. Now it is harder for her to move and, of course, she is not as active as the rest of the gorillas. But the old lady lives a full life. Moreover, her experience allows her to be ahead of the young in some ways. One has only to look at the gorillas while feeding. Papsy is usually in no hurry and never gets involved in fights unless absolutely necessary. She does not climb the ceiling and does not pick out carrots from little accessible places, like Benya or Shinda (after all, age makes itself felt!) Papsy is sitting quietly downstairs, but somehow every time she has at least 30 pieces of carrots in her hands! Papsi shows us what a big role old and long-breeding animals play in the communities of some species, how important their experience, knowledge and assistance they provide in raising children are for the population. And how much in common can be found in the behavior of humans and great apes — our closest relatives in the animal world.
