A great reason to get to know these ancient wise animals closer. To this day, the head of the scientific and methodological sector of the Zoo, Vladimir Frolov, wrote a text about our turtles. Turtles are one of four orders of reptiles. These are 346 modern species distributed in tropical and temperate climatic zones almost all over the Earth and living both in water and on land.

A distinctive feature of all turtles is the shell. Its most important function is protection from enemies. In case of danger, the vast majority of turtles pull their heads and limbs under the shell, which makes them practically invulnerable. The shell of newborn turtles is soft, and in some adults, it can be so strong that it can withstand a weight 200 times the mass of the turtle itself. The shell consists of two parts: the lower - plastron and the upper – carapace. Most often it has two layers: internal (bone) and external (keratin).

The terrarium of the Zoo contains 16 species of turtles. Among them there are giants, such as the black elephant turtle living on the Galapagos Islands, whose dimensions can reach 130 cm and weight up to 300 kg. Our smallest turtle is a spider, endemic to Madagascar, the length of its shell is only 15 cm. The openwork lace of the yellow pattern on its dark brown shell resembles a spider web, for which this rare turtle got its name. Also in our terrarium there is another endemic of Madagascar – a radiant turtle with a beautiful domed shell.

The shell of turtles can be covered not only with horny scales, but also with soft skin, as, for example, in a two-legged or pig-snouted turtle, which leads mainly an aquatic lifestyle in the rivers of Australia and New Guinea. She goes out on sandy beaches only for laying eggs. Its fore and hind limbs have acquired the shape of flippers, like those of sea turtles. It got its second name, pig–faced, for the similarity of an elongated nose with large nostrils with a piglet, like a pig. This funny turtle can be seen in an exotarium in an aquarium with stingrays.

The so-called elastic turtles living in savannas with rocky ledges in Kenya and Tanzania have a special shell. They have it so soft that it is noticeable how the turtle breathes, although it is covered with horny scales. Thanks to such a soft shell, elastic turtles, in case of danger, climb into the narrow crevices of small rocky ledges and swell slightly, resting against the walls. In this position, it is almost impossible to get a turtle. This amazing turtle breeds well in our zoo.

I would also like to mention the rare Mexican box turtles in the collections of zoos, in which the anterior and posterior lobes of the plastron are mobile and can completely cover the retracted limbs and head. The turtle turns out to be closed as if in a box, hence the name boxed.

The big-headed turtle, which lives in the cool mountain streams of Southeast Asia, has such a large head that it does not retract under the shell and is therefore covered with a thick horny shield. To prevent the turtle from being carried away by a strong current, its limbs are equipped with powerful claws, with which it holds on to the rocky bottom of the stream. Thanks to these claws, big-headed turtles perfectly climb the almost vertical rocky shores of mountain streams.

In the summer enclosures of the terrarium, you can see such fairly large African turtles as the panther and spur-bearing, as well as the giant Seychelles. All these turtles live beautifully and for a long time in our zoo, and some, such as the red-legged South American turtle, breed annually.

In the zoo, land turtles are mainly fed vegetables and fruits. The diet of freshwater turtles includes fish, meat, squid and various types of insects. Among those and others there are also omnivorous species. Medium-sized turtles live up to 50-60 years in captivity, large turtles, such as the giant Seychelles turtle, can live more than 150 years.
