Facts you might not have known about
1. Polar bears live in the Arctic zone of Canada, USA (Alaska), Russia, Norway and Denmark (Greenland).
2. Polar bears are the largest predators. Adult animals can reach more than 2.5 m in length and weigh about 680 kg.
3. Polar bears are adapted to life in almost the harshest conditions on our planet. Thick fur and a 3-4 cm layer of fat protects their bodies from hypothermia in the frosty air and icy water. In addition, fat makes the animal's body lighter, allowing it to stay on the water better.
4. The polar bear's fur is actually not white, but transparent, the hair inside is hollow, filled with air - this helps the animals to keep warm better.
5. But the skin of a polar bear is dark, almost black in color, it helps it absorb the sun's rays and reduces heat dissipation.
6. These animals have an incredible sense of smell, thanks to which they can smell prey from a distance of up to 16 km!
7. Despite their impressive size, polar bears are excellent swimmers. They are met at a distance of more than 100 km from the coast. They easily swim at a speed of about 10 km/h, using their wide paws as paddles.
8. Although bears are excellent swimmers, they are not agile enough to catch up with a seal in open water. Therefore, they hunt on the ice: most often they ambush and wait until the seal appears on the surface to breathe.
9. Polar bears have a very characteristic structure of the digestive tract - the intestines are shorter and the stomach is much larger than other members of the family, which allows a hungry predator to eat a whole seal at once. Most often, however, the bear is limited only to the subcutaneous layer of seal fat, eating it together with the skin. The meat is eaten by arctic foxes and seagulls, who often accompany him on his travels. However, a very hungry bear also eats seal meat, and at one time it can eat up to 20 kilograms or more.
10. Bears give birth to their cubs in snow dens in November or December. There the family is protected from the harsh Arctic winter. Newborn cubs are about the size of a guinea pig. They come out of the den four to five months later. The cubs will stay with their mother for about two years, during which they learn the skills necessary for survival in the Arctic. In the zoo, as in nature, the cubs appear at the end of autumn, but they are not shown in the aviaries until February. They spend the first 3-4 months of their life with their mother in a den. Grown-up cubs go to other zoos. In the Zoo, bears are allocated two enclosures, in one of them, in addition to the mandatory pool, there is an installation from which it snows on summer days. Bears like to rest near a snowdrift and hide leftovers in it, and their children enjoy playing in the snow. Feeding of polar bears in the Zoo is very diverse. They prefer meat to everything else, and they like fish mainly large. From a variety of vegetables and herbs, first of all, bears choose a green salad. They also eat various cereals. Two adult polar bears are currently on display at the Zoo - a female Murma and a male Wrangel, as well as a young female. The Center for the Reproduction of Rare Species near Volokolamsk contains a female Simone and a small female from nature, Nika. All the polar bears of the Zoo are under the care of PJSC NK Rosneft.
